---
title: The Chaos of History (part 1)
tags: [history]
image:
  url: /assets/img/chaos-of-history-1/Assassination_of_Archduke_Franz_Ferdinand.jpg
  alt: Aftermath of the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajewo
  attribution:
    url: https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Assassination_of_Archduke_Franz_Ferdinand_1914.jpg
    text: CC BY-SA 4.0 via Wikimedia
other_routes:
 - /2016-07-21-chaos-of-history-1/index.html
teaser: >
  We like to think that systems like human society have some predictable order,
  when in reality, history is driven by completely unpredictable random events.
---

## One Who Causes History

Think of the history of the twentieth century and who is most responsible for
it. You might be thinking of world leaders like Franklin Delano Roosevelt,
Joseph Stalin, or Mao Zedong. Or perhaps you are thinking of those who invented
the technology that changed the world, such as Albert Einstein or Tim
Berners-Lee.

But I suggest a man you probably haven't heard of named Gravilo Princip.

The day started off poorly for Archduke Franz Ferdinand when three security
officials were left behind, by mistake. Then an assassin threw a bomb at his
car, and the rest is history!

Actually, it isn't. The bomb bounced off his car and the exploded without
injuring the Archduke. The motorcade sped away to protect him from any other
assassination attempts. This moment is what Ceasar must have felt when he
exclaimed "The Ides of March have come, and I am still alive!".

Princip realized he lost his chance, so he gave up and went to a nearby food
shop. But when the motorcade started up again, someone forgot to tell the driver
to change the route. By the time the Archduke's staff realized, the transmission
jammed in their automobile (still a recent invention), so the it stopped _right
in front of an awe-stricken Pincip_.

By a ridiculous stroke of misfortune (or luck, depending on your point of view),
between the security officials being left behind, the first failed assassination
attempt, the driver not knowing the route, the transmission jamming, Gravilo
Princip had his opportunity. On June 28, Princip shot and killed Archduke
Ferdinand, setting in motion a chain of events which would result in the First
World War.

## Princip's Butterfly Effect

As you might know, the treaty which ended World War One involved massive war
reparations to be paid by the Germans. The German people came to resent of these
foreign powers spread, which fanned the flames of nationalism represented by the
Nazi Party. Thus begins World War Two.

As you might know, the victors of World War Two partitioned off Europe, and
while they were doing so, certain tensions among the victors emerged. This led
to the stand off of the Cold War.

So Princip brought about a series of events which caused the Cold War. Or
perhaps the Archduke's driver should be the one whom we say brought about these
events. Or perhaps the man who owned the food shop that Princip stopped at, for
if he were not there perhaps Princip would gone to a different place that wasn't
on the motorcade's route.

Some would counterargue that the Austro-Hungarian empire was already ripe for
conflict, and if not Princip, then someone else would set it off. But if it was
set off in the middle east as a result of Ottoman aggression (there was unrest
in the region ever since the Young Turk Revolution). Maybe the alignment would
have been different. Russia would not feel compelled to defend the Slavic
peoples, and maybe Russia uses this hypothetical war to seek a warm-water port,
and with the manpower of Russia weighing on the other side of the scale, the
outcome could be drastically different. The specific details of these events can
matter a lot

## False Assumptions

We like to think that systems like human society have some predictable order. We
like to think that this order is affected by world leaders and important
people. We like to think that things happen for compelling reasons. But when a
world war breaks out on account of the chauffeurs wrong turn, I realize that
human society is so vastly complex and intricate that some events are just so
'out there' to be foreseen.

Historical trends and forces are powerful and determine the 'steady' events,
like the US economy growing a few percentage points per year. However The most
interesting events that really make a change, like the housing crisis or 9/11,
are completely random and unforeseen, even by scholars. That course of history
wasn't determined by simple rules ore logical reasons. It's just Lady Fortuna
spinning her wheel.

## Further Reading

- [Part 2](chaos-of-history-part-2)
- Scientific American: [Gavrilo Princip, conspiracy theories and the fragility of cause and effect](http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/the-curious-wavefunction/gavrilo-princip-conspiracy-theories-and-the-fragility-of-cause-and-effect/)
- [Chapter 1](http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/22/books/chapters/0422-1st-tale.html?_r=0) of 'The Black Swan' by Nassim Taleb
