GiveWell is an economic utilitarian analysis. This kind of analysis can offer insights like: 1. Try to improve the lives of children because they have more life left to live. 2. Poor people in Africa are as a group worse off than poor people in the US, so you get the best bang-per-buck overseas; It can be called "selfish" to donate to poor people in the US when you could be donating to poor people in Africa (no value judgement on "selfish" though). 3. It takes about 4,000 USD to save the life of a child in Africa through the use of malaria nets [2].

The only downside is that it is an economic utilitarian analysis. There are good reasons to be selfish and donate to the foodbank across the street instead. Maybe you care about engaging your local community. I would give my left kidney if my mother needed it. Notwithstanding, there are tens of thousands of people who need kidneys, and I'm not willing to give mine to them. My mother's life is more valuable to me than those others. That is why it is important to look at their value calculation, where you can insert your own values and moral weights [1].

Despite the shortcomings of economic utilitarianism, the idea of evidence-based charity is really important. The top hit on Google for "best charity" takes me to CharityNavigator [2]. CharityNavigator bases their ratings on what percent of money goes to administration vs to the beneficiaries. This is a totally bogus thing to care about. Administration is useful if it makes the remaining donation more efficacious (e.g. more planning or hiring better employees). The right question (if your value is helping people) is exactly that, "how effective is this charity", for which CharityNavigator is silent. Doing good takes more than good intentions, and often charities with good intentions actually hurt the people they are trying to help [3].

In general, social work has this problem. People--even altruists--donate because it makes them feel good. However, sometimes they are more attracted to the human contact than helping people in the abstract. Many people donate to this program in Africa that pairs you with a child, you get a picture of the child, and they write you letters. BUT, it can be a lot more useful to donate to the communities and schools than any specific child. Donating to the child is good, but it doesn't directly improve important institutions that affect many children. It's easier to get people to sponsor individual children though.

I think the real challenge is for good charities to try to be attractive to donors, sometimes through pretense. Most people who donate to Kiva think they are microfunding some individual small business or poor individual, because they literally have you click on a poor individual and click donate. However, you really are donating to the parent corporation gives your donation to their partners who make loans to individuals and small businesses like the one you clicked. They got flak for this a while back [4], but can you blame them? They are trying to solicit donations from humans after all.

[1]: https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1BmFwVYeGMkpys6hG0tnfHyq__ZFZf-bmXYLSHODGpLY/edit#gid=1377543212
[2]: https://www.charitynavigator.org/
[3]: https://www.givewell.org/giving101/The-Wrong-Donation-Can-Accomplish-Nothing
[4]: https://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/09/business/global/09kiva.html?_r=1&scp=1&sq=Kiva&st=cse
