I have argued with a lot of people about "Marxism-Leninism" recently. I want to explain why these arguments have been unproductive for me, how I could be won over to their side, and what worldview I currently hold.

I think the most reasonable alternative to Marxism-Leninism is not laissez-faire capitalism, but rather a liberal socialist democracy. When I use this word "liberal" I mean it as in "liberal democracy," not "liberal" as in "liberal vs conservative." Liberalism is the idea of government by the consent of the governed with individual liberties, human rights, freedoms of speech, assembly, religion, press, and private property.

Marx and Lenin both attacked other progressives who wanted to combat inequality and injustice on the basis that they were too liberal. Marx wrote his greatest contribution to communist theory was the idea of a dictatorship by the proletariat, which he insisted could only be brought about by force. Lenin wrote a polemic called _"Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder_ attacking those who wanted progressive reforms without the iron fist. Not only did Lenin argue against liberalism, he acted against it during the Kronstadt Rebellion and his suppression of dissent within the Soviet Union. I think the argument in favor oppression is that the Marxist-Leninists are so confident in the goodness of their mission that the ends justify the means. I could be persuaded to this perspective, but the burden of proof is greater given that the means are so repugnant. I think this is the primary sticking point for most people, not just me.

However, modern Marxist-Leninists that I have spoken to do not attempt to justify that use of force; instead they point out **injustice** (e.g. racial injustice) and **inequality** in current liberal democracies. This does little for me, because it only shows that liberal democracy is _coincidentally_ deleterious, not that is _necessarily_ deleterious. I don't claim to know how to fix those problems, but I have not yet been convinced that they are impossible to fix while maintaining liberal democracy. **Injustices** in liberal democracies arent't the fault of liberalism; they are the fault of liberal democracies not being liberal _enough_. For example, the US has a problem with police brutality, but a truly liberal judicial system should safeguard the civil liberties of people against the police. This could have been the opinion of Thomas Jefferson ("when the people fear the government, there is tyranny; when the government fears the people, there is liberty"), if he was alive today. **Inequality** in liberal democracies could potentially be rectified by redistributive welfare and socialism. Most liberal democracies in the world have embraced the idea of redistribution, but perhaps need to take their policies further. I should think these policies can be enacted without violent revolution.

On the other hand, I _could be_ convinced by arguments that a liberal democracy would never voluntarily create redistributive welfare, that such welfare is inherently unsustainable, that such welfare is unethical, or that such welfare is otherwise undesirable. These are the hard-hitting arguments that Marx and Lenin made (e.g. Marx's classic argument that the tendency of rate of profit is to fall). Marx needs his followers to update his "tendency of the rate of profit" theory with all of the interesting economic history that happened after he died for that argument to be successful. If successful, any one of those arguments is a cause for me to drastically reconsider my worldview.

My worldview being: I agree status quo in the current liberal democracies has systemic problems. By some corollary of Occam's Razor, I think the best solution is the least disruptive one. I am for liberal and socialist reforms. Starting a new nation from scratch would throw the baby out with the bathwater. In the US, that baby is all of the hard-fought progress the US has made in the past two and a half centuries: the Fourteenth Amendment, the Great Society, universal public education, etc. Imagine the logistical burden of rebuilding just one of those institutions. I think incremental progress is possible and desirable. Where the constitution has problems, we need amendments. Political dissent is actually necessary, because it helps us know when we are wrong. Those dissenters need protection from the government. Religious groups and political parties should be free to assemble and express themselves as they see fit. Democracy is the worst form of government, except all the others, and likewise English Common Law is the worst judicial system, except all the others. I think this worldview is common among those who are not Marxist-Leninists, and _this_ is what I need to be talked down from, not the worldview that the Western world is currently a paragon of virtue as it stands.

When I presented this worldview to a Marxist-Leninist, they pointed out that every ounce of incremental progress won by the working class in a liberal democracy is ultimately a conservative measure. These victories pacify the working class and delay the necessary communist revolution. That is totally an unproductive argument for me. To a Marxist-Leninist, delaying the revolution is a serious and deleterious consequence, but to everyone else, a revolution isn't necessarily inevitable or even desirable. The argument to convince me of their side presupposes I am already on their side. This argument is particularly bad, because every piece of evidence I could present of liberal democracies doing the right thing can be interpreted as the Marxist-Leninist doing as the wrong thing, if one starts from their premises. Their premises make the claim "liberal democracies are conservative" unfalsifiable, and I try to avoid believing unfalsifiable statements.

The end-goal for Marx in Das Kapital is a global, classless, stateless, communist (not socialist) society. Socialism and dictatorship by the proletariat are just necessary stepping stones. Resources would be distributed to each according to need and from each according to ability. I would like to hear from communists, how would society function without laws or a state to enforce them? Without property or a state to enforce it, what prevents one person from taking something they want from another person? To me, these are unanswered questions, and as this is the entire goal of the global communist revolution, it calls the entire mission in to doubt, or they should not be called communists.

If you're not for a dictatorship won by violent revolution, you might not be a Marxist. If you're not for an iron-fisted single-party government, you might not be a Leninist. There is common ground between us that we won't realize. On the other hand, if you are truly a Marxist-Leninist, I am willing to be won over, but please address liberal socialist republics in general not specifically US, explain why freedom of religion is incompatible with a just society, why violent revolution is the *only* way forward---or perhaps I am completely misinterpreting the Marxist-Leninist position.
